---
layout: post
title: Macroeconomics I
author: Prof. Vollrath
category: class
course: Econ 7343
---

This is the first-semester graduate macroeconomics course. It is taught with Prof. Yi. My section of the course will come first, and cover models of economic growth. 

## Notes and recommended books
1. [Lecture Notes](/assets/macroquarter.pdf), these are required reading
2. [Aghion and Howitt](http://amzn.to/2hkuXRr), and feel free to grab an older edition
3. [Barro and Sala-i-Martin](http://amzn.to/2hkuXRr)
4. [Wickens](http://amzn.to/2vfBhPO)

## Class structure and grading
You have four responsibilities for this class:

1. Reading: You should have read up through the listed material in the calender *before* each class. In class, I will be discussing important points from the notes, but will not be strictly lecturing through the material.
2. Projects: These will be worked on *in class*, where I'll be available to answer questions and guide you towards an answer. The projects are like open-ended homework problems. Some of the projects may take more than just the officially scheduled time.
3. Homeworks: These are assigned each week and due on the following Friday in your TA section.
4. Exam: On October 9th, in class. 

As per the overall course syllabus, exams count for 45% of your grade, so my exam is roughly 22.5% of your grade. Homework counts for 45% of your overall grade, so my projects and homeworks count for about 22.5% of your grade. My evaluation of your participation will be combined with Prof. Yi's to form the last 10% of your overall grade.

## Calendar
**August 20th**. Basic accounting and elements of the Solow Model.

1. READING: Chapter 1 and Sections 2.1, 2.2, 2.3
2. PROJECT: [Labor Shares](/assets/proj-labor-share.pdf)
4. EXTRA: BSM (Chap 1.2), AH (Chap 1)

**August 22nd**. Consumption and welfare.

1. READING: Section 2.4
2. PROJECT: [Divergence](/assets/proj-divergence.pdf)
3. ASSIGN: [Homework 1](/assets/ec7343-hw-solow.pdf), due Aug. 31st

**August 27th**. AK growth models.

1. READING: Section 2.5
2. PROJECT: [Convergece Speed](/assets/proj-convergence.pdf)
4. EXTRA: AH (Chap 2), BSM (Chap 4)

**August 29th**. Productivity growth.

1. READING: Sections 3.1, 3.2
2. PROJECT: [Uzawa's Theorem](/assets/proj-uzawa.pdf)
3. ASSIGN: [Homework 2](/assets/ec7343-hw-ak.pdf), due Sep. 7th

**September 5th**. Productivity accounting.

1. READING: Sections 3.3, 3.4, 3.5
2. PROJECT: [Levels accounting](/assets/proj-kyratio.pdf)
3. ASSIGN: [Homework 3](/assets/ec7343-hw-prod.pdf), due Sep. 14th
4. EXTRA: AH (Chap 5)

**September 10th**. Multiple goods.

1. READING: Section 3.6
2. PROJECT: [Structural transformation](/assets/proj-sectors.pdf)

**September 12th**. Multiple goods.

1. READING: Section 3.7
2. PROJECT: Continue on [Structural transformation](/assets/proj-sectors.pdf)
3. ASSIGN: [Homework 4](/assets/ec7343-hw-multipleXXX.pdf), due Sep. 21st

**September 17th**. Endogenous growth.

1. READING: Chapter 4
2. PROJECT: [Sources of growth](/assets/proj-ideas.pdf)
4. EXTRA: BSM (Chap 5,6,7) AH (Chap 3,4)

**September 19th**. Endogenous growth.

1. READING: Chapter 4
2. PROJECT: Continue on [Sources of growth](/assets/proj-ideas.pdf)
3. ASSIGN: [Homework 5](/assets/ec7343-hw-endogXXXX.pdf), due Sep. 28th
4. EXTRA: BSM (Chap 5,6,7) AH (Chap 3,4)

**September 24th**. Basic savings problems.

1. READING: Section 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
2. PROJECT: [Capital flows](/assets/proj-savings.pdf)

**September 26th**. Long-horizon problems.

1. READING: Sections 5.4, 5.5, 5.6
2. PROJECT: [Real and nominal savings](/assets/proj-investment.pdf)
3. ASSIGN: [Homework 5](/assets/ec7343-hw-save.pdf), due Oct. 5th
4. EXTRA: BSM (Chap 2), W (Chap 2, 3, 4)

**October 1st**. Endogenous population.

1. READING: Sections 6.1 and 6.2
2. PROJECT: [Population and productivity growth](/assets/proj-population.pdf)

**October 3rd**. Endogenous population.

1. READING: Sections 6.1 and 6.2
2. PROJECT: [Demographic transition](/assets/proj-transition.pdf)

**October 8th**. **EXAM**

1. WHERE: In class
2. WHAT: All material to this point
3. RETURNED: Pick up in my office
4. PRACTICE: See old midterms from [2013](/assets/f13_midterm.pdf), [2014](/assets/f14_midterm.pdf), [2015](/assets/f15_midterm1.pdf), [2016](/assets/f17-midterm.pdf)
