---
layout: post
title: Growth and Development II
category: class
course: Econ 7350

---

This class is for upper level graduate students. The course will be split between Prof. Vollrath and Prof. Yi. This syllabus covers the material in Prof. Vollrath's part of the course, which will cover the first half of the semester.

Class is in McElinney 212, M/W from 10-11:30am. 

## Course Requirements
There are six assignments. I will distribute handouts with details on each assignment in class, as necessary. The percentages listed refer to the portion of your overall grade for this course, and hence add up to 50%.

1. **Due Jan 24:** (5%) Nested production structures
2. **Due Jan 31:** (5%) Solving with Pareto distributions
3. **Due Feb 14:** (15%) Accounting for structural change
4. **Due Feb 28:** (5%) Nested Boppart model
5. **Due Mar 19:** (10%) Replicate Ziebarth paper
6. **All semester:** (10%) Class participation

Several of these require extensive data work and coding to produce, so please read the assignments and plan appropriately. Each calendar day that an assignment is late lowers the percentage you can earn by one. For example, if you turn in the Ziebarth replication on March 20th, the *best* you can do is earn 9 of the possible 10 percentage points. Hence the first two homeworks will be worth zero if five calendar days late, and the other assignments will be worth zero if ten calendar days late.

## Course Material

### Models of multiple goods
This part of the class is a standard "notes and homework" section. We'll go over ways of incorporating distinct firms or industries into otherwise standard growth models. 

**Jan 17**: Multiple goods and expenditure shares

**Jan 22**: CES, in discrete and continuous terms, price effects

**Jan 24**: Income effects and non-homotheticities

**Jan 29**: Distributions of productivity, generalized means

### Structural change and growth
One of the central features of economic growth and development is the shift of economic activity out of agriculture, into manufacturing, and then ultimately into services. Those industries tend to have different productivity levels and growth rates, but at the same time we continue to see balanced growth in the aggregate. How do we explain and reconcile these facts? In this section, we'll be studying specific papers.

**Jan 31:** {% reference hrv2014 %}

**Feb 5:** {% reference np07 %}

**Feb 7:** {% reference boppart2014 %}

**Feb 12:** {% reference Herrendorf:2013kl %}

**Feb 14:** {% reference ag08 %}

**Feb 19:** {% reference baumol67 %}

**Feb 21:** {% reference young2014 %}

### Misallocation across firms and sectors
The standard model is built assuming that workers and/or capital can move freely between firms or industries, meaning output is maximized given preferences and technologies. However, there may be frictions, and these lower output to some degree, possibly acting as a large part of cross-country differences.

**Feb 26:** {% reference hsieh2009misallocation %}

**Feb 28:** {% reference baqaeefarhi2017 %}

### Spatial allocations
Economic activity takes place in distinct locations within economies, which makes understanding the spatial allocation similar to understanding the allocation across industries. This includes the processes of urbanization.

**Mar 5:** {% reference desmetrh2014 %}

**Mar 7:** {% reference mrr2012 %}

## Supplemental reading
We'll be covering the papers listed above in detail, but there are of course far more papers in these areas. What follows is a rough set of related papers. I've erred in including papers with tangential connections, in order to avoid being too narrow.

### Structural change

{% bibliography -q @*[keywords ~= alloc] %}

### Misallocation

{% bibliography -q @*[keywords ~= misalloc] %}

### Spatial and urbanization

{% bibliography -q @*[keywords ~= urban] %}