---
layout: post
title: Text
published: false
category: feed
---

A quick disclaimer on this post, which was written in large part while attempting to stay awake and adjust to UK time after a flight in which I wasn't able to sleep. It could well make absolutely no sense.

The 
Mark Koyama just [posted](https://medium.com/@MarkKoyama/the-poverty-of-the-peasant-mode-of-production-121b90c933b4#.ti8zv1w0y) a critique of the use of the "peasant mode of production" (PMOP) as a concept. The context of his post is interpreting the Roman economy, but his general point about the PMOP is that the concept is a needless complication in how we think about people's behavior in poor environments.

Perhaps the way to explain the distinction is with every economists dream, a physics analogy. Koyama's view - which I share - is that comparing the peasant economy and the modern economy is like comparing a cannonball to an airplane. There are incredible differences, yes, but the basic physics governing their flight is the same: some combination of gravity, thrust, and air friction. The PMOP views the peasant economy and modern economy as more like comparing protons to planets. The rules governing their behavior - quantum mechanics and classical mechanics - are fundamentally different. 


At roughly the same time, Marc Bellemare had a very nice post on the concept of "[separability](http://marcfbellemare.com/wordpress/11993)" in development economics. This turns out to have a very nice parallel with Koyama's post on the PMOP, and could help illustrate why Koyama - and I - think the PMOP is a case of mis-interpreting a lack of observable market exchanges.

Think about a peasant household. The household makes both consumption decisions (how much to eat, what kinds of food to eat, etc..) and production decisions (how much to work, how much to plant, etc..). If household decisions are "separable", then the consumption and production decisions are made independently of one another. That is, the household's choice of what kind of crop to plant is unrelated to which kinds of food they are going to eat. This would be like my production and consumption decisions. I produce economics papers, lectures, and blog posts. I consume Diet Coke, beer, and several other things that are relatively unimportant compared to those. My decision about production may influence my *income*, and hence how much I can consume in total, but they don't dictate how I spend that income on Diet Coke versus beer. 

You can probably see that separability is closely tied to exchange. The only reason I can consume Diet Coke and beer while producing papers and lectures is because I have access to a labor market that hires economists as well as a beverage market that ensures my local store is stocked with Diet Coke and beer.

In contrast, "non-separability" implies that production and consumption choices are linked. That is, what a household produces and what it consumes are inexorably linked. If my household is non-separable, then if I want to drink Diet Coke I have to make it myself. Which would be catastrophic, by the way. Non-separability is a case where the household is unable to exchange goods or services with others. If you've ever taken international economics, non-separability is equivalent to assuming a family is autarkic.

In development economics, a lot of time and effort has been spent thinking about whether peasant families in poor countries are separable or non-separable decision-makers. The reason is that, in terms of understanding poverty and possibly development, the answer is very important. If non-separability holds, households must lack a way to exchange their production (output and/or labor) for consumption goods and services: markets. And if there is a lack of markets, then you can make these households better off by organizing or providing those markets. The argument here is the same as for free trade.

But if households are *separable*, then they are capable of exchanging their production for consumption goods. Some kind of market must exist. The way to make them better off involves improving their ability to produce, perhaps through providing assets or improving technologies. 

How do you distinguish between separability and non-separability? You cannot simply look at consumption and production data for households and see if they line up. Observing that a household consumes what it produces doesn't necessarily imply that the household makes non-separable decisions and that it lacks access to markets - or that it refuses to use markets. You have to take into account that the separable, market outcome may coincide with the non-separable outcome. There may be newer papers on the subject, but one of the classics here is by [Dwayne Benjamin](http://www.agecon.purdue.edu/academic/agec619/PP/HH_mats/Benjamin%201992.pdf) from 1992. I'll just note that he does not look at consumption and production directly. And in short, he cannot reject separability.

Which brings us back to the PMOP. This is based, in part, on observations that peasant families engaged in little market exchange, tending to consume what they produced. The PMOP presumes that this lack of exchange means a lack of markets, or depending on the author, a lack of willingness to use markets. But for the same reason that we cannot assume separability holds - and markets do not exist - because consumption and production are similar, we cannot assume that the willingness or capability to make market exchanges did not exist in historic peasant villages. The PMOP jumps to a conclusion that is not necessarily warranted by the observations.

I think a plausible reason for the same behavior is just that in those historic contexts, the peasant households were so homogenous in capabilities and preferences that there just wasn't much reason to trade. And so we don't need to presume there was something particularly different about peasants, or some kind of unique PMOP. 



