---
layout: post
title: Why do services have low productivity?
published: false
category: feed
tags: sector
---

One of the running themes on this blog has been "Baumol Effects", or the upward drift of the employment share and GDP share of services relative to manufacturing over time. The underlying idea here is that there is a relatively low income elasticity for manufacturing, and so increasing productivity in manufacturing actively moves workers out of that sector. The GDP share of services rises because the productivity improvements in manufacturing lower its relative price, but the low income elasticity means that this isn't fully counter-acted by a rise in the number of goods sold. 

In addition, we also observe that services tend to have lower productivity (either labor productivity or total factor productivity) than manufacturing. The movement of people from manufacturing to services thus puts a drag on aggregate productivity.

So why are services relatively low productivity? And here I need to be careful with words. I'm asking why the *level* of productivity in services is relatively low compared to manufacturing. It also appears that the *growth rate* of productivity in services is relatively low, and that is not what I'm after here. I'm only thinking about the level difference (which is affected by the growth rate over time, I know, but just think of the initial or original level difference). 

A short version of the idea I've got is that services are low productivity because they happen to be very complementary with one another. Within the service sector, what this means is that we prefer to consume all the different kinds of services that exist, as opposed to focusing our consumption on one or two. For the idea, what I'm after is just that individual services are *more* complementary than individual goods within the manufacturing sector are. 

Why do I expect that services are relativley more complementary with one another? Well, the first reason is **love of variety**. This is relatively straightforward to see, I think. We like to spread our expenditure on eating out across lots of different kinds of restaurants, as opposed to everyone always eating at one restaurant. There are lots of little restaurants, but very few mega-restaurants that serve 10,000 people at once. I think a lot of retail is like this as well. While there are mega-stores like Wal-mart and Target, there remains some preference for speciality shops. Personal services - say a personal trainer - are also consumed as part of a variety of services. You don't spend 12 hours at the gym with your trainer, to the exclusion of eating out or shopping at those retail shops. 

The second reason is **location**, which comes from the fact that many services require face-to-face interaction. Lots of services have to be provided locally. Going to Starbucks is only possible if there is a Starbucks close by. You don't go to Starbucks by driving to Seattle. This separates services from goods, where I can easily have a good shipped to me. For services, we need lots and lots of locations available, whereas with goods we can get away with only one or two big distribution centers. By the way, I'm not saying that small locations are less efficient. I'm saying that services simply require lots of locations to provide them.

Let me remind you that I'm not claiming that services are perfect complements, and that goods are perfect substitutes. I'm just claiming that services are relatively more complementary than goods. And within little sub-sub-sectors of services or goods, you could imagine perfect substitution. So while there is complementarity across different *types* of restaurants - Korean, Turkish, Italian - there may be substitution within those types, and so your town only has one of each. Regardless, to the extent that services have a greater degree of complementarity at some levels will make my point follow.

What does this have to do with productivity? Productivity for a sector (e.g. services) is the mean of the productivity of each individual unit in that sector - although hold on to that word "mean" for a moment, because it isn't what you think. The "unit" could be firms, or sub-sectors, or sub-sub-sectors. Let's just stick with "unit" to keep it general. By productivity, I mean either labor produtivity (output divided by number of workers) or total factor productivity (output divided by an index of all input use). 

The construction of that mean across all the units depends on the degree of complementarity in demand for the output of those units. In fact, what you'd actually calculate is a *mean of order x*, where *x* depends on the degree of complementarity. I put a section after this that goes through the math. For the moment, just think of taking the average, except sort of weighting some units more than others, although that isn't quite right. 

It is easiest to see what is happening by thinking of the extremes. If our preferences over the stuff produced by those units display perfect substitutability, then we will naturally only purchase the stuff from the most productive (and therefore cheapest) unit. And therefore the mean is heavily skewed towards the single most productive unit. Productivity for a sector where preferences imply perfect substitutes is dictated by the *most productive* firm or sub-sector. Thus manufacturing has a built-in tendency towards high productivity, because it is dominated by the most productive firms.

Now flip over to perfect complements. Because we have demand for all the various versions of stuff produced by all the different units, we don't want to shift our purchasing to only the most productive firm (e.g. we keep eating some Korean food even though that place is expensive and not that great all the time). We buy stuff from all the units. In fact, we end up spending most of our money at the *least* productive units, because we really, really want some of what they produce (e.g. some nights you just want Korean). Thus the mean is skewed towards the *lowest* productivity units. Now, it isn't so bad as taking the minimum of all the productivity terms, but it is moving in that direction. 

This doesn't necessarily mean that services *must* have lower productivity than manufacturing. There is nothing to stop individual service units from having high productivity levels. But as a sector, when you add up across them, you will tend to get a lower mean productivity level. So services are working with something of a handicap.

Note that I'm not saying that the BLS or BEA or anyone else is explicitly calculating the elasticity of substitution between services or goods. All they have are the real output and a measure of inputs. But in constructing that measure of real output, they are taking a measure of revenues and dividing it by a price index. That price index is going to work like a mirror image of the productivity calculation. The price index of services will tend to be high, because it is something like a weighted average of the prices of the individual services. And because we keep eating at that expensive Korean place, the price index for services is going to be high. High price index, low measured real output, and hence low measured productivity.





### Math it up
I ran through the main explanation in English. But the math is helpful in seeing exactly what I mean about aggregate productivity within a product category. For a given category $j$, let real output be determined by the following constant elasticity of substitution function

$$
Y_j = \left( \sum_i^M Y_i^{(\sigma-1)/\sigma} \right)^{\sigma/(\sigma-1)}
$$

where $Y_i$ is the output of firm $i$, and $\sigma$ is the elasticity of substitution between the individual firm outputs. If $\sigma$ goes to infinity, the outputs are perfect substitutes, and $Y_j = max{Y_1,Y_2,..,Y_M}$ If $\sigma$ goes to 0, the outputs are perfect complements and $Y_j = min{Y_1, Y_2, ..., Y_M}$. If $\sigma = 1$, you have to take the limit to find this, but then $Y_j = (Y_1 \times Y_2 \times ... Y_M)^{1/M}$, which is Cobb-Douglas. 


Let each of the firms producing a good $i$ use the same kind of technology, $Y_i = A_i X_i$, where $X_i$ is the basket of inputs they use. These firms are monopolistically competitive, meaning they take into account the effect of their pricing on the demand for their product. In other words, they take into account that price equal cost relationship from above when maximizing profits. 

$$
\pi_i = P_i Y_i - c X_i
$$

and $c$ is the marginal cost of a unit of inputs. Plugging in for $P_i$ and then maximizing profits with respect to $X_i$. 

Once you roll all the firms back up together to see what $Y_j$ is, you get

$$
Y_j = X_j \left( \sum_i A_i^{\sigma-1} \right)^{1/(\sigma-1)}
$$

Output for category $j$ depends on $X_j$, the total amount of inputs used by that category (which itself is subject to optimization across categories), and this summation term thing which is total factor productivity in that category. Note that this is something like a weighted average of the individual firm level $A_i$ terms. But how you add up those $A_i$ terms depends on the size of $\sigma$, which depends on how substitutable the products are within the category. 






If $\sigma=2$, you've got products that are kinda substitutes. And using our rule from above, $\sigma - 1 = 1$. This makes the aggregate productivity term

$$
TFP_j = \frac{1}{M}\left(\sum_i^M A_i \right)
$$

which is just the mean value of the $A_i$ terms. 

If $\sigma>2$, then the products are relatively easy to substitute for one another. In this case, what you can establish is that $TFP_j$ is *convex* in the values of $A_i$. When that occurs, the average is dominated by itunes
