---
layout: post
title: Text
published: false
category: feed
---

Leave aside the questions regarding the Kaldor facts from the last post entirely. Let's assume that you do want your model of growth to have a BGP. This constricts the kinds of properties your model can have, and by implication it means you think the real world is constricted in the same way. 

### Properties consistent with a BGP
Let's write the rate of return as

$$
r = \frac{s_K Y}{K}
$$

where $s_K$ is the share of output paid to capital, Y is output, and K is capital. There is no big theoretical assumption here, it's just an accounting identity. But given this, we can start to establish some things that must be true. Kaldor said the capital share, $s_K$, is constant. Which means the only way for the rate of return, r, to be constant is if Y and K grow at the same rate.



The key paper here is by Uzawa (TK), who established that having a BGP involves picking one of the following two assumptions.

1. The elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is equal to one
2. The growth rate of capital-augmenting technological progress is zero

These are not forgiving choices, either. It isn't that you need the elasticity to be sort of close to one, or the growth rate of capital-augmenting technological change (CATG) to be close to zero. The elasticity must be *exactly* one or the CATG must be be *exactly* zero.


### Relaxing Uzawa
Maybe Uzawa's restrictions aren't necessary or aren't as knife-edged as they seem. Here's a few examples. Grossman, Helpman, Oberfield, TK. What GHOS suggest is that human capital growth may be sufficient to break the strict nature of Uzawa's conditions. That is, they can write down a model of economic growth that has an elasticity of substitution between capital and labor of less than one, has a positive growth rate of capital-augmenting technological change, and yet still has a BGP. 

Chad Jones has a different approach, and he establishes conditions by which the *aggregate* production function may be Cobb-Douglas, with an elasticity of exactly one, even though the underlying technical production functions of firms are not. Again, once Jones does this, we're back to having the possibility of a BGP.

But this all presumes that we want to rescue the BGP - that economic growth necessarily involves a constant long-run growth rate, a stable capital share, and a constant return to capital. Are we trying too hard to keep the BGP alive?

### Structural Change
A lot of effort has been expended writing down models of economic growth that explicitly allow for multiple sectors (agriculture, manufacturing, services, for example) but that also display a BGP. You can think of there being an ancillary Kaldor fact that these papers want to explain, which is that there has been significant shifts of labor between sectors (generally, ag to manufacturing to services) over time in most economies.

Acemoglu and Guierri, Rebelo et al, Ngai and Pissarides, etc.. are built to deliver both structural change and a BGP. To do so is not trivial, so these models are quite clever in how they set things up to make this work out. In effect, they are writing down new versions of Uzawa that also allow them to account for structural change. 

The danger here is that they are presuming the original Kaldor facts are required. They work very hard to show that structural change can happen while the growth rate of output per capita remains constant in the long run. But what if the growth rate of output per capita isn't constant in the long run? Or, if you don't want to abandon the concept of a BGP altogether, what if there are different BGP's depending on what stage of structural change you are in? 

Remember the French figure from the prior post. You could argue that France had both a pre-WWII BGP (with relatively low levels of GDP per capita and a low growth rate) and a post-WWII BGP (with a higher level and growth rate). Who is to say that this kind of shift to a different BGP, perhaps with a lower growth rate, isn't possible in a country like the US today? Who is to say that level shifts in the BGP, perhaps up or down, are not possible in the future based on structural change? 

I am wary that in straining so hard in our models to fit structural change into the BGP observed in the past (mainly in the US), we may have ignored the possibility that structural change itself influences the BGP. Past performance is not an indicator of future returns, so to speak. 

