---
title: Large-Scale Psychological Differences Within China Explained by Rice Versus Wheat Agriculture
author: Talhelm, T. and Zhang, X. and Oishi, S. and Shimin, C. and Duan, D. and Lan, X. and Kitayama, S.
journal: Science
publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science
volume: 344(6184):603--608
tags: deep
external_url: http://science.sciencemag.org/content/344/6184/603
bibtype: article
category: reference
---
Abstract: On a diverse and large set of cognitive tests, subjects in East Asian countries are more inclined to display collectivist choices, whereas subjects in the United States are more inclined to score as individualists. Talhelm et al. (p. 603; see the Perspective by Henrich) suggest that one historical source of influence was societal patterns of farming rice versus wheat, based on three cognitive measures of individualism and collectivism in 1000 subjects from rice- and wheat-growing regions in China. Cross-cultural psychologists have mostly contrasted East Asia with the West. However, this study shows that there are major psychological differences within China. We propose that a history of farming rice makes cultures more interdependent, whereas farming wheat makes cultures more independent, and these agricultural legacies continue to affect people in the modern world. We tested 1162 Han Chinese participants in six sites and found that rice-growing southern China is more interdependent and holistic-thinking than the wheat-growing north. To control for confounds like climate, we tested people from neighboring counties along the rice-wheat border and found differences that were just as large. We also find that modernization and pathogen prevalence theories do not fit the data.
